John ket wick is retired from not a
motor career he's a lifelong member of
Vietnam Veterans Against the War
he's a member of veterans for peace and
he's the author of and a hard rain fell
a gi's true story of the war in Vietnam
we're going to talk mostly about the Ken
Burns series the Vietnam War and
somewhat John's background so welcome
John and thanks for speaking with me
good morning glad to be here great great
do you want to tell people listening uh
how you how you ended up in Vietnam okay
I was I had a number of scholarships at
the end of my high school career but
didn't have the financial ability to go
on to college and really wasn't that
excited about it either I I'm a car not
have always been a car guard and I
wanted to get under the hood of the car
and try to understand how they work what
would make them work better and all of
that so my father got sick there wasn't
money to go to college I got a job at an
area Chevy dealership and I was in hog
heaven I got paid to drive sometimes 427
Corvettes or you know Chevelle's and
really neat cars and get under the hood
with the mechanics and so forth so I was
on a career path let us say I had long
hair and a set of drums and I was
playing with a couple of different bands
different times and just waiting I
thought that one day magically we would
be discovered and be America's answer to
the Beatles and
I'm still waiting for that to happen but
along came the draft and just threatened
to pull me away from my entire life I
was not the guy they wanted I like most
of the young men at that time and we
were talking 1966 didn't want to be part
of their army I was tall and skinny and
not mentally ready to go and kill people
or be threatened with being killed
myself this was a very very colorful fun
time with the rock and roll music my
buddy had a very top-quality
drag racing car we went to the Nationals
at Indianapolis and everything obviously
at that age I was very involved with
girls and the idea of being shipped to
the other side of the world that had
people shoot at me just didn't appeal in
the least I was not interested did
everything I could to avoid it short of
oh uh Turley refusing which I wish now I
had done or you know escaping the canada
or something like that
we lived in a small town western New
York if I had done something like that
the repercussions for my family would
have been very hard for them to take so
you reach a point where you just say
look I'm certainly not the only one and
I guess I'll go and I'll try to make the
best of it and hopefully
the recruiter rounded up and listing
actually David but the recruiters are
you'll probably go to Germany and you'll
be in a barracks it'll be like a college
dorm and you'll end up having a you know
a really wonderful experience in our
army so I was boxed in there was no
place to go it was certain that I would
be drafted I was walking him breathing
in 1a so you know there wasn't much
chance of getting away and I enlisted
the jet training as a wheel and truck
mechanic and on December 30th 1966 I was
raised my right hand and I was in the
army went through school and all of that
basic was a very horrendous experience
being exposed to some things that I had
never seen before and a group of people
from all kinds of backgrounds and of
course you know I had to figure out how
to get along with them
I found the army extremely demanding and
really unrealistic we were somehow there
was a heavy snowfall let's say a foot of
snow one night we were Sun out the
uniform of the day was combat boots and
your boxer shorts and they handed out
dust pans and we had to shovel the
parking lot with dust pans before this
is like 3:00 or 4:00 in the morning
before everybody came to work and wanted
to park their cars when a lot of guys
got serious colds or pneumonia whatever
it might be if you want on sick call you
were punished for it and to me I mean
bettered any enthusiasm
might have had for the military and it
got worse from there we had a young man
commit suicide it was just it was just
atrocious but I was trapped I was in
there was no way out so I went to school
in Aberdeen Maryland that wasn't at all
bad it wasn't where I wanted to be but
it was you know learning and with a good
bunch of guys and I had volunteered for
Officer Candidate School because I
figured if I'm gonna do this amount of
time that would not add to my time that
I had to spend I might as well get
officer pay and whatever well they
cancelled the class on gimme orders to
go to Vietnam and I I got on the plane
and that Fort Dix and we went through
Alaska in tropical white uniforms we
were outside in Alaska's cold and then
we went to Japan and then on to Vietnam
and that's how I got there so before we
get to your actual experience in Vietnam
what was the mood like in the United
States when you were going was was there
the impression that the war was just
this far off thing that probably wasn't
a good thing but was there a lot of a
lot of anti-war sentiment from the idea
that this war is is morally wrong or
were most people at that point this was
just another war that America was
involved in and people were still
feeling a little patriotic no not that
at all
there was World War two and the feeling
was always very much that that was
worthwhile and they stopped Hitler and
Mussolini and the Japanese have
/ and it was the right thing to do you
know the seeds were sown to call those
guys the greatest generation of all and
then there was Korea nobody talked about
that much but that was a long time ago
Korea happened you know very early 50s I
was born in 1948 the the mood in America
I would say was what the heck is
Cummings and trying to interfere in my
life I think that that time period is
extremely important because we we were
the first generation of American
soldiers who have socially relevant
music call it the protest music but but
an emphasize emphasis in music of get
along with each other do the right thing
you know we're all citizens of the world
and there was the civil rights upset and
just a whole lot of things that made for
that colorful time a very exciting time
that I talked about before there was not
an organized anti-war peace movement at
that time certainly not that I was aware
of and at that time I was working in
Rochester New York I can talk about that
community in the feel about you know I
may have been different in other parts
of America but my experience throughout
my military experience was what 95% of
all the guys that were there and there
were very very few women at that point I
had never really remember seeing one but
95% of all the guys that had to deal
with the military
were opposed to taking part and to the
war in Vietnam this certainly was no
feeling that oh boy we've got to go
fight the Communists on the other side
of the world I I need to do my patriotic
duty and take part in that I understand
there are guys who felt that way but
they were a distinct minority we were
very involved in a lot of things and I
you know I've mentioned cows and our
invention rock and roll we were the
first generation of American soldiers to
have an automobile home in the driveway
when we went to war we were the first to
have televisions
when we were growing up as kids jeez
television came along the neighbor got
one first and we would get off the
school bus and put on a lunchbox and run
over to their house to see Mickey Mouse
Club that I don't know four o'clock in
the afternoon or something we were
brought up on Captain Kangaroo and
Hopalong Cassidy Roy Rogers you know and
I really it could be a hell of a lot to
that but that we watched all of these
programs and the message over and over
was the good guys always win if you do
the right thing if you stand up for
what's good and right and all of that
that you'll triumph in the end and so
you know you hear a lot about oh you had
that sixties idealism yes I do and you
know that's what we were taught is to do
the right thing and we were all involved
in something very exciting whether it
was college or career whatever boy what
a colorful wonderful time to be young
and starting into a career path or the
direction for the rest of your life
the army in the draft threatened to just
trash all of that just to absolutely
yank you out of your entire existence
all your hopes and plans and force you
to do something that you didn't want to
do so it was very adversarial in that
respect I hope that somewhat answers
your question
no absolutely uh I am look fascinating
about the culture of the time but just
one more question before we get into
your actual experience in Vietnam what
was you know just briefly what were some
of the what was some of the music you
were listening to at that time can you
name some of the band that you were
trying to maybe emulate and some of the
stuff that you enjoyed listening to oh
absolutely
the Beatles were a huge phenomenon the
Rolling Stones the rascals the Byrds
Sonny and Cher yeah you did boy it was a
huge list that was a time when
rock-and-roll music became a real art
form and began to be taken very
seriously with the the music these guys
were making what they were saying in
their lyrics everything so it was very
very much a part of our culture as young
people and I'll point out that the vast
majority the biggest numbers of
Americans landed in Vietnam in 1969 or
68 after the Tet Offensive the average
age was about 19 if you get out your
calculator and figure that out at about
14 13 14 15 years old kennedy was
assassinated and then 50 some days later
if I
if I remember why it was 54 days I think
the Beatles appeared on Ed Sullivan and
that was our generations transition the
Beatles weren't talking about social
topics and so forth
at that point very much but it was ready
to come and of course the other one is
Bob Dylan the things he was saying he
was the spokesperson for our generation
and you know now all of a sudden they've
recognized Kings contribution to all of
that and given him a nobel prize for
literature so and his importance was
enormous right so okay so we left you
had first flown to Japan and then you
went to Vietnam do you want to tell us
where the plane landed and go from there
about your how long how long were in
Vietnam
well the plane landed at consonant
airbase we got off the plane and got on
buses to be taken over to what they call
the replacement facility and the buses
had wire mesh on windows and somewhere
along the line somebody yelled the
driver what yelled what is this with
this screen on the windows and he said
that so that people won't throw a
grenade and it's like wait a minute I
thought we were here to help these
people if they'd be on our side until
that moment I think most of us I
certainly had the impression that the
Vietnamese people would be kind of like
now you saw the the people on this
street in Paris when the GIS rolled in
and they had kicked the the Nazis out
and they were tossing flowers and
that taken well it wasn't that way the
Vietnamese people despise us sauce is
just another foreign colonial war power
and they wanted us out so immediately
within a half an hour after getting off
the plane you are confronted with the
fact that boy these people don't like
you and will look for an opportunity to
kill you and Jesus made the year ahead
look like a long long time mm so where
where were you do you want to tell us a
but you talk you wrote this really great
article called Ken Burns Vietnam and a
bowl of popcorn because you're talking
about your experience watching the
kemper and show but you you know you
talk a little bit about what it was like
in Vietnam and some of the things you
saw what was your experience with the
with the actual war itself
well again I was a truck and tracked
vehicle mechanic when I first you ride
there and I was stationed in pleiku very
near to fourth division Camp weather we
had our own separate facility and our
job was to repair the trucks that were
running
Conroy's bringing supplies from quinion
up to play cool and then from Pleiku
basically up to docto and the roads were
dirt and very crude they would shake the
trucks apart
it was either deep mud or later on that
would become very dusty in the dry
season it was very hard on vehicles and
our job was to keep them on the road
hang them back together and get them
ready to go so
later on I it was found out that I had
done body and fender work and painting
and so forth on the outside and they
were in desperate need of that so they
transferred me over and I became a body
and fender man and related with that
along with that was welding and I
learned to be a fairly good welder what
I would call certified so we did you
know a lot of work with that and had a
number of instances the the convoys were
being attacked fairly regularly I'll
mention that when I first went up to
docto and by now it was probably October
I have pictures that I took well the
trees actually hang on both sides of the
road so close that they would hit the
muse on the you know I was driving the
equivalent of the 18-wheeler type of
thing and with the side mirrors out
there the trees would brush against them
on both sides of the road later on they
bush hog a wide wide shoulder on both
sides and you'd sprayed it with Agent
Orange and whatever and that rid of all
those places to hide but it was a scary
ride I had an occasion in November when
the truck right in front of me hit of
mine and we were all hauling ammo up to
dokdo it was at the time of the Battle
of Hill 875 and things were very extreme
and we're hauling ammo on this guy to
the mine
it's exploded big-time right in front of
me somehow I drove through it and came
out the other side and everybody stopped
and went back and there was this
gigantic hole in the ground and I can't
explain how I got through that but I did
and then had to get back in the truck
and go on to Dachau where it was
horrendous incoming rockets and mortars
and just utter call it combat chaos mud
up to your knees the whole world was
just oozing water and this the skin
coming and guys desperate you know we
were supposed to give like ten boxes of
ammo and each gun point and Jesus they
jumped on the truck and threw everything
off yeah immediately we need this spot
you know so it was a it was a very
desperate night where I spent the night
with them in a trench and watched a
young armored personnel carrier go
outside the wire and open the back door
had rope they would tie around the gi
bodies ankle and dragged them over to
the next one and the next one was like a
stringer of fish when I was a kid and
went fishing you know and I dragged him
out of there because they were under
fire and it was the only way to retrieve
the bodies horrendous just incredible to
see arms fire kept coming in all night
whatever so it was a very very
horrendous trip
then uh very scary I could go on I don't
know how much time and whatever when I
first got to play cou they put the new
guy on garbage detail so we went around
they had 55-gallon drums used as garbage
cans everywhere and we emptied all of
them into the back of a Deuce and a half
truck and headed off to the dump which
was a big ditch bulldozed out and he
backed up to it it was I'm going to say
probably 20 feet deep and you threw your
garbage out into this gigantic hole
while there were 30 or 40 Vietnamese
civilians down underneath there going
through it looking for anything to eat
there were other more you know South
Vietnamese army guards around and they
for whatever reason I assume they were
ordered to tell people they couldn't
take anything with him and there was a
guy I actually have a picture of them
just shortly before the problem happened
but he found - what I'm gonna call like
a gallon can of vegetables probably
Tomatoes or something like that a full
unopened and he tucked one under each
arm and headed for the water and
God told him to stop and he didn't and
he was going as fast as he could go with
one of these cans under each arm and the
guard shot him in the back and he went
down on his knees and through the barbed
wire just amazing he obviously had
practiced and off into the bush with
this huge red all over the back of his
white shirt it was horrendous to see but
then there was no reason sky was no
threat to anybody and you shoot him in
the back was just oh my god what am I
looking at you know then the trip to
docto there were other things that went
on for a year it was incredible we had
during the rainy season they had a guy
drowned in what was called the motor
pool the water was so deep there was a
hole or a low spot where water was
overhead he couldn't swim and drown that
kind of thing just it was mind-blowing
it was unbelievable what we were
watching something does that come close
yes absolutely uh you know I for the
time I'm good for as much as you want to
watch and what does you want to speak so
uh you know don't don't worry about that
stuff but no that's you know I think
that kind of your first-hand experience
gives us an idea of compared to what it
was elected let me go into one more
incident and I try to try to say it
without being overly offensive but it's
a it was a fact at that time that the
Green Berets were not issued anything
that part of their training to make them
resourceful was you don't give them
anything they have to go find it on
their own so they they came and they had
trucks that needed parts and everything
we would take parts off we had a
wrecking
junkyard and swap with them and it was
November it was getting near the
holidays and everything but they said
look we are the case of stakes if you'll
bring us these parts and they made a
list I will give you a case of frozen
snakes
geez okay that's cool somebody made the
deal and a guy he was from the
houston/galveston area and taught me a
huge amount about woven but anyway our
the two of us had a 3/4 ton pickup truck
with welding equipment on the back and
we were to drive these parts out to this
firebase and get the case of snakes and
bring them back well we got out there
and it was a big event going on and I
would say hey guys you're gonna see this
you know this is the real world and they
had brought in three Vietnamese women
young ladies they had lost the Green
Berets had lost one of their guys the
night before and they wanted to
interrogate these girls and everything
and they they use lit cigarettes and
slap them around and whatever and they
wouldn't tell where the Vietcong world
and I mean you're watching this
absolutely surreal thing going on and we
were all standing around like an
audience you know just just watching
people torturing these women it was so
incredible and ultimately got to a point
where this is where I've got to be
careful how I say this but this firebase
in the middle
nowwhere had a firetruck an old beat-up
OD green fighter truck sitting well in
the middle of nowhere and it turned out
they used it for showers and I don't
know what all but it was there and they
ended up with this one young lady using
the fire hose and the pressure and
everything to explode her body - with
water pressure to actually blow her
apart that sounds I you know guesses no
no but but it did it happened and the
spray when her body gave up when she
died
sprayed all of us and sprayed across my
face and I when I talked with young
people I try to tell them you know after
almost 50 years washing my face so many
times every day I can't wash that stain
away you you were absolutely the middle
of nowhere with these macho macho guys
and you couldn't say anything you
couldn't do anything we got in the truck
and left and just went oh my god what
did we just see and the hard part of the
whole thing obviously is that you were
there on the other side of the world I
was at that time a PFC private first
class no authority no nothing you grin
and take it and keep your mouth shut and
tomorrow will be another day and I'll
probably be just as unbelievable
today was and there was there was no way
out you were you were trapped you were
serving a sentence just like a guy in
prison for the army it was 365 days the
Marines it was 13 months but you were
you were trapped in this thing and just
trying to survive and it was a very very
emotionally scarring experience it was
awful and there were all kinds of things
that we saw time after time after time
that just blew you away but there was no
way out all you could do is try to
survive
try not to in any way endanger your
buddies the guys around you we were very
close you know at that point there was
virtually no race tension in the
military you know we kept our friends
alive they kept us alive we were all in
it together so it was just a very very
extreme experience for a kid that grew
up on a farm in western New York there
had never been anything like it and
certainly no training or preparation for
the whole industry saw that would help
us to deal with that at the moment or
later on so the seeds of PTSD were
everywhere and you know it was just
something to be endured to try to
survive there was no feeling old boy I
am serving my country and doing a
wonderful patriotic thing and making
America stronger or better it was just
I'm caught in the middle of a nightmare
if I can survive long enough I'll get on
a plane and go back to real life and and
this movie will be over and everything
would be good again and of course that
wasn't entirely realistic but we were
damn young and inexperienced and trying
to just make the very best of what we
had and it was a huge challenge just to
stay sane and try to keep focused on
going home all right so you you go
through this and now you come home you
had left at country that you talked a
lot about 60s idealism and you come back
after this experience back to the land
of plenty which is the United States
what did your experience is there how
did that change your impression if it
did of the United States as you returned
and you want to talk a little bit about
what it was like coming back and then
then we'll talk we'll start to talk
about your experience and how that
compares to what Ken Burns are showing
in astone all right
what you must be aware of I I did things
a little different than a lot of people
I again enlisted so instead of two years
in the Army if I'd been drafted I had
three years so one it was getting toward
time for me to leave Vietnam I would
have 15 months left to do in the army
and we were hearing horrendous things
about the United States and what was
going on with the protests and all of
that this is I left Vietnam in September
of 68 and you can imagine with the the
assassinations of Martin Luther King
Bobby Kennedy the Democratic National
Convention and war in the streets of
Chicago
or everything that was going on it was
like you know I I don't want to go back
home and be assigned to stand on the
steps of the Pentagon and hold a ban at
loaded rifle against the protesters
because I'm now very very much on their
side this is a horrendous terrible thing
and should be ended immediately and to
have to defend that I just couldn't take
that chance so I Island feared instead
of coming home to go to Thailand and
spent the next year in Thailand it gave
me something to get out of the army 90
days early and to get my head together
it's like I like anit to his scuba diver
who has to rise slowly or he gets the
bends I had that extra year of time in a
an oriental Southeast Asian society but
one that was on our side that wasn't
particularly threatening and to get my
head screwed on straight before I came
that they came we flew home it was
incredible you got on the plane
commercial airliner and at one point the
captain came on and said you know guys
if you've got windows you look outside
we're going over Vietnam and you can see
explosions down below and little red
explosions and then you know we ate
drank and made merry all the way back to
San Francisco I'll process out at
Oakland when I was out of the army you
had to wear your uniform home to get
just the what army discount on flying
and everything so I was in uniform took
a taxi with a couple other guys and we
went to San Francisco Airport when we
got out of the taxi and walked in there
were hippies everywhere whatever you
want to call or very unusually dressed
people and I'm going to say no one said
a word to us no one threatened us spit
on us anything like that whatsoever we
walked on by got on a plane I flew to
Dallas and then from Dallas to Detroit
and from Detroit to Rochester New York I
was a little bit horrified in Dallas had
the opportunity to go out tiny into the
airport where they had restaurants and
things like that and there was a
souvenirs they stand sewing postcards of
John Kennedy in the Lincoln with
Jacqueline just moments before he was
shot and everything act like my dad
that's not something that you send a
postcard home I was there but anyway was
a very strange emotional time I came
home I had had a lot of time and done a
lot of thinking about what am I going to
do how am I going to go on with life
from this point you know most of my high
school classmates had gone on to college
I had not I'd gone to that other place
how am I going to do this and I wanted
to get a job I had done a tremendous
amount of welding I felt like I had sand
in my eyes I didn't really want to do
that anymore so I'd have to see what
there was I came home I bought a new set
of drums
and started looking for a job and I
ended up getting a job as a new and used
car salesman at a Volvo Fiat triumph
Jaguar Saab Lotus dealership and tried
to tried to form a life now when I was
in Vietnam back in Rochester New York
there was a young lady that was going to
nursing school at one of the hospitals
and one night a lady came in to their
dorm from a group called Operation
morale and said you know we were
encouraging people to write and send
care packages and so forth the guys from
this area that are in Vietnam she had a
whole list of names addresses and each
of the girls close her eyes ran her
finger down the list and chose three
guys to write to and uh young lady chose
my name she wasn't thrilled she had two
lieutenants and I was a PFC but
everybody said wow you chose him he got
a write to him so she started writing me
letters and when I got home I looked her
up and within a year we were married and
have been married for more than forty
seven years so that's a interesting part
of the story um there was a huge amount
of anti-war activity everybody was tired
of it nobody could justify it it was if
you were under I'm gonna say 30 or 40
years old you were involved in it and it
was just a tremendous nationwide focus
that we've got to get out of the place
there's the rock-and-roll influence
again but you know we've got to stop
this war this is just incredible and you
got into things like Kent State and so
forth it was just oh my god you know
what is happening your country what
where do we go from here what what how
do you earn a living how do you take
power in what's really important to
protest the war how do you balance all
these things and go forward it was a
very difficult traumatic time okay so
we're here we are 50 years later let's
let's talk a little bit about let's try
to compare what Ken Burns has shown in
his you know 18 hours compared to your
experience or what what you'll feel is
left out I think a lot of people well
you wrote something in your your article
that the Ken Burns series is delivered
to my living room with all the slick
advertising and hype of a delivered
pizza like the abhorrent draft notice
that showed up in my mailbox half
century ago this series is supposedly
too important to ignore so what is your
feeling about you've got the build-up
for the burn series you've got the the
government is doing these kind of 50th
anniversary commemorations what is your
feeling about about such commemorations
compared to your experience do you feel
they're giving an honest honest voice to
to what you experienced Yes No
you know it's never going to be perfect
unless somebody followed me around I
think overall the Ken Burns series was
probably good was certainly important
that it gave voice to the Vietnamese and
some things that most of America has not
been exposed to and there was a theme
throughout all of that of sadness and
disillusionment with the GIS people that
were there I loved that it had the
recordings of Johnson talked in the
MacNamara or Richard Nixon with
Kissinger and made it clear how from the
very top the the focus was to mislead
the American people to put a spin on it
to present certain facts and not others
and you know not tell the whole truth to
carry on that war regardless of whatever
we must not let those protesters get in
the way of our war and I thought that
was horrendous a lot of things that were
missing what do you want to Utah hurt
sorry sorry yeah I just want to read you
said in your article again you said this
is nostalgia focus on old film clips and
memories or impressions of a few
survivors but he fails to recognize the
despair and dysentery
he recognizes this fair and
disillusionment of a few soldiers but
there's not there to explain the
corruption profiteering mismanagement
attitudes or strategic blunders that
destroyed morale throughout the Vietnam
era military so what could he have done
what the birds have done to kind of show
some of the bigger picture things or
what do you think some of the things
that were missing well
I am convinced that John F Kennedy was
killed was eliminated by forces within
the CIA the FBI the Joint Chiefs of
Staff the military-industrial complex
that Eisenhower warned us about because
he was not a war monger he had started
into his presidency being a cold war
believer and all of that but by the time
the Cuban Missile Crisis he communicated
with Khrushchev offline and a series of
secret communications that didn't come
to light until just a few years ago and
they agreed they both were younger
fathers with children and agreed that
you know we cannot just allow things to
get out of hand and have a nuclear war
that eliminates all of life on this
planet we've got to find a better way
and so they they found ways to avert
disaster with the Cuban Missile Crisis
and so forth
the war mongers and i don't mind using
our words and it's the only one that
fits just had a hemorrhage they just had
a fit and one kennedy would not assign
air power to help the Bay of Pigs when
he did a ban on nuclear testing with the
Russians when he gave a speech at
American University in June of 63
calling for peace and saying you know if
the rest of the world will work toward
peace we will it was a landmark that
that made
many of the warmongers very upset there
were forces within the Joint Chiefs of
Staff that wanted to nuke Havana when
they find through Russian missiles in
Cuba that wanted to nuke Hanoi and maybe
go right on - we used to call it pay
King now it's Beijing not sure how that
happened but anyway Communist China if
we have to let's nuke Moscow at one
point they wanted to nuke leo's I mean
and in Kennedy made a couple of remarks
so these people are nuts you know this
is craziness so I don't think that
transition of Kennedy to become a
peacemaker and then the assassination to
prevent him from carrying through that
type of an agenda was presented well at
all they did not present the fact that
Eisenhower had felt Wales was far more
important than Vietnam and had installed
a lot of particularly CIA activity their
advisers that were CIA they looked
around and and certainly had very close
ties with the Mafia
based on the Bay of Pigs and so forth
trying to help certain Cuban refugees to
take back their country where the Mafia
had a very very lucrative casino
business so there was a strong tie
between the CIA and
and they looked at this area that was
known as the Golden Triangle northern
Thailand Burma Wales for its huge opium
growing industry and they set up at a
little village called long Tien in Wales
a factory to refine the opium poppies
into opium and heroin and ship it around
the world through Tanzania airbase this
little village of long Tianna I had seen
pictures of it it's absolutely
mountainous terrain they had five dirt
runways and it was the busiest airport
in the world and it was all shipments of
drugs in and out through Thomson route
nuyen kalki among others got a
percentage of the profits and the planes
were not inspected or deterred in any
way they deliver drugs around the world
there was no mention of that and those
people who were personally profiting so
hugely did not want the war to end and
and they're living possible to keep it
going to increase it to make sure that
their business venture would not be
threatened for as long as possible
that's what we were up against the
average high school kid who got drafted
could not influence that in any way but
you know he could shed his blood to
lubricate the damn thing and keep it
going as long as possible and that's the
shame of it all that's the you know when
a guy was killed over there he said he
was late
that's exactly what the word that should
have been used she didn't accomplish
anything for our country for Vietnam but
for a bunch of crooks who were making a
lot of illness at money you know that
that's what you were dying for and it's
just a shame do you it kind of brings up
a problem of that you know we find the
country is still involved in in similar
wars we could walk through the fact that
the country in the 70s we knew came home
and when a lot of the vets came home was
like you said in your article for a
short while America lost its taste for
militarism and war then we saw Ronald
Reagan sell arms to the Iranians to help
a bunch of thugs in Central America
commit the very crimes that Isis commits
today how did how did the country go
from that sense that the Vietnam War was
wrong
into the Reagan years and got us back
today and do you think that burns use
this film to to kind of make us think
about today or do you think he missed a
chance to to make us reflect on Vietnam
and how it relates to what we're doing
today well I think he missed that
opportunity overall totally yeah the
first night the burns program came on
the leading to it when they said oh this
is funded by David H cook oh boy
you know Bank of America and the Mellon
corporation so for this it's all boy no
there was no tie in to anything after
Vietnam this was a picture of Vietnam in
that
very time limited context I would say
but the idea that folks in the Pentagon
warned how to manipulate and that they
would do it again and our doing it again
was never ever even suggested how did it
you were you work with Vietnam veterans
against the warrior you work with the
veterans for peace how was how was
organizing going through the through the
80s and what kind of what kind of things
were they're able to do and then did you
see - hear about you know hear about
Grenada I'm trying to overcome the
supposed be UNAM syndrome which you know
the idea that which is for a peaceful
world could be a syndrome and sickness
of some sort is extremely bizarre but
did you see a point maybe the Persian
Gulf War was there were there a point
where you started to see the lessons
from Vietnam kind of fade into the past
in in the United States yeah yeah I
think 2003 early 2003 when we had
decided that we were going to invade
Iraq worldwide there were protests
people in the street and numbers were
totally unprecedented across this
country that just never had been that
many people came out into the streets to
protest and it was ignored there was a
huge PR campaign it's real nice to say
oh we have a volunteer army we don't
have the draft anymore and thank God for
that but along with that in order to
entice young people to join the know
theory to volunteer there has been a
huge and I think immoral advertising
campaign and marketing and Merchandising
campaign you know george w bush lands on
an aircraft carrier with a big sign
mission accomplished when nothing had
been accomplished it was a sole job it
was boy you know pat yourself on the
back we grade and televise it and kids
will come out and join by the droves
that was that was all sick it was
exactly at that time when the myth of
all these hippies and airports spinning
on soldiers when they came back and
abusing them took place I will say that
I believe something like that happened
occasionally in very few instances it's
totally out of character with the
American people and why the American
people have allowed the Pentagon
marketing people to instill the sense of
guilt this guilt trip upon us what we
did during Vietnam was terrible and you
know sell that bill of goods is
unconscionable it's just ridiculous but
look at the things that have happened
the John Kerry was a legitimate American
military hewo he did very exceptional
good work the guys that were with him
praised him but Along Came the Swift
Boat campaign when he tried to run for
president and undermined him why he
didn't speak up and get mad and
grab a television microphone and say
this is pure [ __ ]
guys you know uh you're trying to smear
me it's totally unrealistic why he
wasn't aggressive then I will never know
I don't understand that but it's a
number of incidents like that really
changed the face of America it became so
young to be patriotic
this is 2000
what 2,000 degree with the invasion of
Iraq 2001 with the attacks on the World
Trade Center and the Pentagon was a key
point I think but marketing and
merchandised
to the older mode and not to the
country's benefit whatsoever all right
so let's get up time for a few more
questions I don't want to keep you I
know you've got your I'm trying I'm
trying okay great great
I want to go back a little
maybe I'm getting this out of order but
you know you saw a lot of things in
Vietnam that were very disturbing and we
have a Winter Soldier testimony you know
there's things like me lie
you wrote this in your article again
that Ken Burns delivers pictures of dead
people and disturbing quantities but he
was not there to describe them as
atrocities do you think that Burns was
able to get across kind of what war does
to people and what what really the some
of the things that were going on on the
American side were an army look
atrocities things like that right I
think the program was pretty good in
that respect in every case that I can
think of the ones that certainly made an
impression on me you took
gie a veteran and he gave him the
ability to tell his story and described
that by the end he was totally
disillusioned
morally damaged wounded by what he had
seen and what he had experienced and
emerged from it as and I walk there was
a fellow John Musgrave Tim O'Brien bill
Earhart you know just a number of people
were allowed to say that now the a
friend of mine pointed out and he's
absolutely right
all of the veterans that Ken Burns
interviewed and put on television in
front of us had gone to Vietnam
willingly even maybe enthusiastically
I'm gonna change the world I'm gonna
fight communism I'm going to be a good
patriotic American and I will go back to
my earlier statement 95 percent of all
the people that I saw heard lived with
in my military experience were opposed
to going to Vietnam did everything they
could to avoid it didn't like it when
they got there were angry I will say
that sabotage and a small degree but
sabotage by those people out of anger
was a factor in what happened in the war
and this idea of FTA to hell with the
Army in their war I want no part of this
was everywhere everywhere so yeah I
think that came across fairly well I
think
you know he could have done so much more
with it but I don't remember if the
segment on the Tet Offensive was an hour
and a half or two hours I don't I never
sat down with a notebook and put a
checkmark every time he said oh the
enemy suffered a huge defeat at the Tet
Offensive but it was numerous numerous
numerous times nowhere in that hour and
a half or two hours
did he interview the average guy that
was in Vietnam that felt that oh my god
we have here another Pearl Harbor
this attack unexpected and widespread
throughout every town and village in
Vietnam oh my god I'm a long ways from
home and I don't know if I'm ever going
to make it back because these people
that enemy Army is so much stronger than
we have been told and we've been led to
believe nowhere did Ken Burns mention me
let's call it a controversy the fact
that general Westmoreland lied about the
number of enemy out there facing us just
prior to the Tet Offensive oh boy you
know
Westy soon CBS and almost went to trial
with an actually went to trial that gave
up this suit the first day when he
discovered there were 28 field grade
officers standing in line to testify
against him and so yes this is exactly
what this man did he dropped the suit
and CBS agreed that to besmirch his
honor give me a break
that never came up how can a never come
up there is a military leader who
sabotaged his own men and there was no
accountability whatsoever
the message to today's military leaders
a young guy that graduated from West
Point and went off to Iraq or
Afghanistan is that in the back of his
mind that boy oh boy you know the
Pentagon is gonna stand up behind me and
I can get away with anything there is
the the most blatant case in the world
and and nobody did anything about it
that is so important you talk about
cheering over what we learned in Vietnam
to today that message that precedent is
so ungodly that yeah and then they want
a series of TV commercials and say be
all you can be
mmm ridiculous it's just absurd
let's see let's um
to look over the list of questions I got
here let's let's let's get closer to
wrapping up on this if what is the you
know if if you had your chance for 18
hours of national television you know
what are the points of about your
experience about your look back now with
the history of the whole thing what are
the points that you would make about the
Vietnam War that you would we would give
to the American people and especially to
the to the next generations well I have
a another book in New York in the hands
of my literary agent looking for a
publisher those are like a lot of things
but Vietnam told us showed us clearly
that our government will lie to us will
misrepresent the facts will not tell us
the straight truth we'll do whatever it
wants to do in order to wage and a
totally unnecessary war you can look at
it as international
illegal but just totally unnecessary
general westmoreland said Vietnam was a
great opportunity to test our latest
weapons and strategies gee that's great
three and a half to five million
Vietnamese Laotian and Cambodian people
guide vast majority of innocent
civilians had got caught in the wrong
place at the wrong time under bombs from
a b-52 for instance but there is a
element that Eisenhower called the
military-industrial complex when he
originally wrote this the script for
that speech it was the military
industrial intelligence complex that he
warned the American people was becoming
a very serious threat and should not be
allowed to gain too much power and
authority well they certainly did to the
point I think of assassinating the
president and seizing power and
authority to wage their duty war 58,000
Americans died three and a half to five
million Southeast Asians died no one was
held accountable no one has been held
accountable for the 16 years of very
similar spinning your tires or quagmire
whatever you want to call the wars in
Iraq and Afghanistan and they've been
able to be successful and pulling it off
and it's a shame that the American
people have allowed them to do that yes
you know it's important that through
Vietnam veterans against the war in
particular and veterans for peace
groups as we've gone on Iraq war Iraq
Veterans Against the War has done a lot
a lot of really meaningful work people
have tried to speak out people have
tried to steer our country back to being
a force for good in the world and not a
source of death and destruction it's a
shame that peacemaking
doesn't offer the profitability that
death and destruction does America now
is in the business of death and
destruction our manufacturing base is
all but gone the only thing that we
export is weapons far more than any
other country anywhere in the world we I
believe was selling weapons now to 160
countries we have a military budget that
is just eclipses I think the next seven
or eight countries in the world combined
but is beyond any measure and what
happens last week Congress had some a
gift of another 81 billion dollars when
all we were asking for was 54 and then
they tell us that oh we we can't afford
health care we can't afford Social
Security and Medicare and Medicaid we
have to cut back and those in quote
entitlements so it you know we'll have
money to to continue to defend America
we have 800 military bases all around
the world no other country has that
wheel in the business of death and
destruction and it's a damn shame
there is not what they teach in grade
school you know it's not what the image
of America is if you walk down the mall
in Washington and look at
the monuments to Jefferson and Lincoln
and Washington and Martin Luther King
and so many people who were respectful
of every human beings rights to life
liberty and the pursuit of happiness
unfortunately America doesn't stand for
that anymore they continue to mouth the
words but we are in the business of
death and destruction business has been
very good a lot of people are profiting
very very much and I don't know how it's
ever gonna get turned around some of us
try we speak up where we can and try to
point this out to the American people
and I consider that my patriotic duty I
know a lot of other people that do too
were you know trying to swim upstream
but at the same time you got to do it if
you're going to keep your conscience
clear so I hope that answers your
question no actually it doesn't you know
it's a lot to think about when you have
these big anniversaries of an event as
traumatic and complex kinds of Vietnam
War you know it's this time to reflect
on these things for sure so is there or
is there any is there anything I missed
you want to you know it just had the
last word and also tell people you know
where they can get your book and mention
the name of that again all right I'll do
that
the other thing that I would mention is
one of the things that was developed in
a little bit different strain from the
Vietnam War was the concept of
post-traumatic stress or PTSD veterans
recognizing that their buddies coming
home were traumatized and we're having a
hard time
set up storefront rap centers and the
opportunity for guys to talk it through
with their peers and tried to help these
people the time came when the official
medical community the psycho experts and
so forth recognized something was going
on out there and they came up with a new
term in the stead of shell-shocked or
whatever they they decided we'll call it
post-traumatic stress disorder I try to
make it a point when I'm dealing with
the VA I insist that they in my case say
it's post-traumatic stress damage not
disorder the people who can watch see
what you see in a war the horror and
destruction and in gore and all the rest
of it and not be affected are the ones
with a disorder we need to look at that
PTSD is in the case of coming home from
a war and feeling very ill at ease about
what you'd seen it's it's a short
abbreviation for conscience people look
at the horror of modern war with modern
weapons and tactics particularly the
American Way of fighting war and they
are damaged morally because of the
overall reliance on unbelievable levels
of violence and if civilians get in the
way we're supposed to just shrug it off
and say oh well shouldn't have been in
the way and I shouldn't have been there
that's what that Chelsea Manning made
available to the American people was to
show evidence of this and was sentenced
to 35 years in federal prison as a
result and thank God Obama
pardon the poor kid that was an atrocity
in itself post-traumatic stress damage
moral damage from war is a very very big
factor these guys are going and young
ladies are going to Iraq and Afghanistan
and being asked to do things they're
blatantly immoral that are disrespectful
of the Afghan or the Iraqi people and
they come home bothered by this it's not
a disorder it's a symptom of the moral
irresponsibility of our government and
what they're trying to do again we're in
the business of death and destruction
business has been good the people who
are profiting will do whatever it takes
to keep ad in motion and it's an
atrocity in itself and does not do our
country any good you know fifty years
from now you wonder what what will
America be what will be the payoff from
all of this I don't have very optimistic
outlook for where our country's headed
it's a shame ya know in a town is yeah
I'm sorry the book is called and a hard
rain fell taken from Bob Dylan's a hard
rain's gonna fall long before anybody
else credited that song with being about
Vietnam originally it was thought that
and a hard rain's gonna fall was about
environmental threat to America and the
world but I saw a lot of things and
there where have you been my blue-eyed
son that I was trying to and
worth telling what I had seen and what I
had known and what did it felt like and
what I was thinking about it it's
available pretty much in any bookstore
certainly Amazon and Barnes and Noble in
those places and it's true and it's
honest and there's a whole lot of very
naughty woods in there but I find it's
very popular in high schools and
colleges and now I encourage people to
read it it's it's true and it's hard to
read at times but if you want to know
what it really was like I have done the
best I could to try and describe what it
was really like well thanks a lot and I
am glad to have you share your
experiences and you know everybody is
listening and myself so thank you very
much John
yeah I know yeah thank you very much for
talking alright David I thank you I
appreciate the opportunity
this is our hidden history
you